Overview of Iperf 2 design
By Robert McMahon
September 2020
Code at rev 2.0.14

This document helps to describe the iperf 2 design. It's quite complicated. It's hoped this overview will help someone to understand the code.

Iperf 2 is a designed as a multithreaded program. It's also a hybrid of C and C++ code. It's evolved over time having different developers starting with 1.7 version then stalling at 2.0.5. A new group with a WiFi focus took over the code base starting at 2.0.6 and up to 2.0.14. The only link between the groups been the code itself.

Threading overview

There are multiple threads being a listener thread, a reporter thread, and one or more traffic threads. The traffic threads are either a server or a client.

Listener (src/Listener.cpp include/Listener.hpp):

The listener thread runs on the server side when a user issues a -s for server, it actually starts the listener thread and not a server thread. The goals off the listener thread are

o) open the listen socket with is set with -p or defaults to 5001
o) issue the socket listen() command
o) optionally bind the listen socket to a multicast, unicast using the -B
o) optionally bind the listen socket to a device or interface
o) hang an accept() for TCP
o) simulate an accept() for UDP
o) Upon a new connection install the peer's (client's) IP address into an active table which returns a sum report
o) Instantiate a server thread and set it up settings
o) Apply client initiated settings to the server thread
o) Instantiate a server object
o) Spawn a server thread which will receive traffic from a client

Reporter (src/Reporter.c include/Reporter.h):

There is one reporter thread for a client and one for a server (excluding full duplex traffic where the reporter handles both a client and a server.) The goal of the reporter thread is to decouple user i/o from traffic. This allows the tool to measure traffic performance unrelated to user i/o. The reporter thread also does traffic accounting. The reporter thread outputs the followint types of reports

o) settings report
o) connection report
o) data reports (intervals, sums and final)
o) server relay reports (server report send back to the client for display)

The reporter thread and traffic threads communicate with one another using a circular buffer or packet ring.  The reporter thread also has job queue where threads can post reports to be displayed.

o) Perform traffic accounting for individual traffic threads
o) Perform traffic sum accounting
o) Output all reports - Settings, connections, and data

Traffic (Clients and Servers):

The traffic threads perform the reads and writes on a socket. It posts the results, e.g. byte counts, of those reads and writes with timestamps to the reporter thread. These threads are decoupled this way to try to keep the tool as a network i/o - i.e. the primary focus of traffic threads are network i/o which are the performance being reported. There are two types of traffic threads being a client and a server.  There can be multiple or parallel traffic threads using the -P option. There is one packet ring for every traffic thread. The traffic threads post their results into this ring which the reporter will process. The traffic threads are the producer and the reporter thread is the consumer. This ring is designed to minimize mutex and shared memory contention.

The goals of the traffic threads, starting with the client

o) perform socket writes
o) shape the traffic if the --isochronous option is set
o) rate limit the traffic per per the -b setting
o) post into its packet ring for the reporter

The server will

o) perform socket reads
o) rate limit the reads if -b is set
o) post results into its packet ring

Settings (src/Settings.cpp include/Settings.hpp):

The settings structure contains the user requested settings and there is one settings object per thread. The settings are read and parsed from the initial command line (using a version of gnu getopt) Each thread gets a settings object which is mostly ready prior to spawning the thread.

Timestamps

This section descries the multiple timestamps used by perf 2.

Reports

Common settings are deep copies from the thread settings object. This help to decouple and encapsulate reporting from threads, e.g. a thread can terminate prior to a report finishing the thread posted.

Data Report and packet rings

The data report warrant its own section do to it complexity.  The core of the data report is a packet ring and statistics per that traffic thread. The packet ring allows the traffic thread to communicate read or write statistics to the reporter thread using shared memory and very limited syscalls or mutexes. The packer ring has proodcder and consumer pointer. The ring elemeentw are report structs.

Packet rings (src/packetring.c include/packetring.h)

A packet ring is a circular buffer between a traffic thread and reporter thread. A traffic thread is a producer and the reporter thread is the consumer. There is one packet ring per each traffic thread. The one reporter thread services all the traffic threads' rings. A traffic thread posts packet, read or write information using a Reportstruct. This is the necessary and sufficient infomation such that the reporter thread can perform the threads performance accounting as well as display interval or final reports.

Summing (src/list.cpp include/list.hpp)

Packet or read or write summing is done on a per client (host ip) basis. All traffic from a specific client will be summed. The active client list is kept in a linked list. A new client will trigger a new sum report.

Function vectors (src/Reports.c src/Reporter.c src/ReportOutputs.c)

The implementation of the reporter uses function vectors to handle the various types of traffic reporting. It's done this way so there aren't any inline tests, i.e. the function pointers are intialized at report creation time.  These consist of

*packet_handler() - this is used to account for tcp or udp write or read called for every read or write
*transfer_protcol_handler() - used to ready the data before it's output handler is called,
*transfer_protcol_handler() - used to ready the summation data before it's output handler is called
*output_handler() - used to format output and print the output
*transfer_interval_handler() - used to select between time based or write/frame/burst reporting

Mutexes and Condition variables:

Startup (src/main.cpp src/Launch.cpp)

There are two primary aspects of startup. The code is in main.cpp and Launch.cpp.

Client startup

Server startup

A day in the life of a UDP packet

Write the packet microsecond timestamp and sequence number into the payload

Debug support using configure --enable-thread-debug
